Tom Crenn of the Getty Museum, let's put this close to you, and you were just saying that you're thinking about an exhibit on manuscripts?
Yeah, the idea would be actually to go through the collection and pull out the manuscripts that come from great American collections, or great American collectors, in fact, or interesting American collections, and then, I mean, normally, in fact, we try to talk about the images and the decorations, but I thought it might be interesting for the public to actually realize
Well, first place, I think, A, there's so few great collections of illuminated manuscripts in America that when they discover these things, I mean, most people don't even know illuminated manuscripts existed and understand that painted books in the Middle Ages was a great art form.
And so, sort of as part of that educational process, I thought it would be interesting to point out that there were great, and there have been great, American collectors of illuminated books.
Private collectors?
Private collectors.
And that, in fact, some of the great books in our collection come from these
I mean, they were purchased, obviously, they weren't given, but nevertheless, they come from great American collectors, and there is a tradition.
I think it's just not known.
I mean, book collecting is one of the more low-profile, perhaps, collecting habits, I think.
Maybe you, I don't know, I actually may have a different point of view on that.
That was the essence of my piece in the New York Times.
Did you see my Times piece?
Actually, I did.
But that was one of the thrusts there, is that while the art market has had a swoon in the last few months,
Gets all the glamour.
Book collected is kind of steady, but nobody pays that much attention to it.
Yeah.
I mean, I think in the case of illuminated manuscripts, there are two reasons.
One is the books aren't known.
I mean, this is just my speculation.
You know, it isn't even known.
Illuminated manuscripts aren't known as an art form.
And the other thing is books are small, and people, I think, look for physically large works of art.
I mean, I think there's an American way of thinking or a modern way of thinking about museums that great works of art are large works of art.
And in fact, we're doing a show on late medieval French manuscript illuminations.
And in the 15th century in France, most of the manuscript illuminators were painters.
They weren't separate professions.
And so the painters to the king were also manuscript illuminators.
And artists like Fouquet, who was one of the great 15th century French painters, probably illuminated many more manuscripts than he painted paintings and was perhaps as great or greater as a manuscript illuminator.
So, in fact, in the Middle Ages, of course, this was a major art form, but my feeling is that people don't grasp that because the books are small.
And somehow painting in a book today seems like a secondary thing.
And it's often thought of, I think, as a minor art, but that's not true.
It certainly wasn't in its own day.
Certainly, you know, seeing the exhibits, I mean, it's a very unusual exhibit.
You have the Bible on you.
Right, exactly.
Well, at a place like this where you are strong under ruminations, of course, you'd have these exhibits.
You know, Morgan had a lovely one last year on it, that show, Illumination.
That was a great show.
But, you know, the blockbuster shows are painting shows.
No, that's true.
I'm hoping we will move into an era of blockbuster manuscripts.
They've shown most of the paintings that we've shown, I think.
Well, it could happen.
I think the thing is, also, most of the great collections of Illumination manuscripts are libraries, and libraries exhibit, but they don't exhibit in the way, they don't, their exhibiting function is much, is a much lower priority than in a museum.
And therefore, there is not the great tradition of showing manuscripts.
In fact, we show our manuscripts probably more, especially for the size of the collection.
It's a very small collection.
We show manuscripts much more often than most other institutions.
I mean, the Morgan Library's collection is five or six times the size of our collection.
But in fact, they don't necessarily have a show all year round.
But we do four shows a year that last for about 10 or 12 weeks.
And so there's always something on view because we treat them in a sense
You know, we fall somewhere between a work of art and a book, in terms of simplest categories, and we treat them as works of art.
So we feel we have an obligation to the public to always have something on display, and at least have a collection of some of the great things in the collection on display, because they come here to see works of art.
So we're not a library.
I mean, the Center has its library and its collections, and it's a different kind of collection.
That doesn't mean we don't make stuff available to scholars.
I have this fellow out here.
Professor Rowe, who's an anthropologist, we happen to have one great South American manuscript, and he's working on it.
So we have scholars come all the time to use the collection, and we supply photographs and microfilms and whatever we can to help people publish things.
And we are publishing, we've done, we've supported various kinds of publications like this too.
But our function, I think my primary goal is to show great works of life to the public.
I'm an art guy.
You have a reading room, per se, where you bring out the manuscripts.
Well, we do, actually.
This room here, it just happens to be rather small and cramped because the collections have gone so fast.
And you do allow them access to the actual documents?
Yep, he's looking at the manuscript now.
He is.
So, yeah, no, no, we do.
I mean, you have to be a qualified scholar.
You can't let sort of the man off the street look.
No, I understand that.
But we do allow...
I have a couple books that we restrict access just because they're so fragile, and for one reason or another, you simply don't.
You can't take the risk.
I mean, books are fragile because they have to be handled.
A painting, you can always move it around by the frame, but in the end, a book, you have to sort of turn the pages, and every time you handle a book, you change its color, as it were, because some humans rub songs.
That is the focus here, though, that the artifact is
as a work of art, as opposed to a book.
Exactly.
And so content is basically irrelevant, not irrelevant, but secondary.
It's not irrelevant, but secondary.
Exactly.
I mean, in fact, the fact that we're called the Department of Manuscripts is a bit of a misnomer, because our goal is to represent the history of the art of manuscript illumination.
I mean, it's really a collection of illumination, if you like.
And we're trying to represent the great schools, the great artists,
We are trying to represent, to some extent, the great texts that were illuminated insofar as it's possible.
We have actually a rather good collection of illuminated babels.
We just brought in a couple of miniatures which illuminated the Boethius manuscript.
In Boethius, the Consolation of Thasby, was the most popular book in the Middle Ages after the Babel.
And in the 15th century, for example, it was incredibly popular, and there were lots of illuminated copies.
So we do actually, it's not a primary goal, but we want to have a representative collection, the same way you aim to have a representative drawings collection or a representative paintings collection.
We want to be able to tell the story of the history of manuscript delimination.
It's a great history, I mean, it lasted for whatever, 12 centuries.
Just to, for a moment, if you could just give me a little bit about yourself, how long you've been here, and how long you've been actively working in manuscripts, a little background of yourself, if you could.
Well, I've been here since 1980, actually 11 years and a couple weeks, a long time.
And I came as the associate curator of paintings.
And when I came in 1980, there were only three collections, which were French Decadive Arts Antiquities and Old Master Paintings.
And although Getty had died and the will had been read and it was clear that the money was going to the museum when I was hired, in fact, it was another year and a half before we went through the courts and the estate was finally settled, so we didn't start buying for one.
And then, actually fairly quickly, in the summer of 82, Krauss, a representative from Krauss, his daughter, came to visit us with Jake Zeitlin and wanted to talk about some manuscripts, and it was all rather vague.
But I was in the associate curator of paintings, and my boss knew that I knew about manuscripts because I'd written a master's thesis at Yale on manuscript illumination.
And I'd, actually, I'd been organizing an exhibition, and I'd, in the meantime, also been organizing an exhibition about manuscripts.
So he knew that I was like the one person.
There were only three curators in the museum and one associate curator.
It was really a small mom-and-pop show in those days, practically.
And so I was actually in this fortunate position that I knew about manuscripts and any of these people were coming, so fine.
So I went along to the meeting.
And they pulled out the first catalog, first volume, I think it was, of this.
We're going to see how it looks like that.
And actually, there was this.
Did this post that?
This is kind of an interesting story.
Yeah, 79.
So this had been published already.
That's a catalog of the Ludwig collection.
Yeah, that's a catalog of the Ludwig collection.
And there were these prospectuses of the other volumes which were yet to be published.
This is actually one of the books.
These are the books that Mary Ann brought on that day to the gate.
Mary Ann Crouch.
Yeah.
And... What did you think?
Well, the thing was, I knew a little about it, because this is kind of a... This story is...
is discussed in, you know, circles.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, it was terrific for me.
I'm just stating it, of course, as you know, but I mean, it's a very interesting story.
Yeah, the thing was I knew the collection because it had terrific Flemish manuscripts, and since I'd written my Master's Thesis on Flemish Manuscript Illumination, I'd never seen it, but I knew of some of the great books, and I knew in the mid-'70s they bought at sale a completely unknown Flemish manuscript, which has turned out to be one of the
one of the greatest and most important of all, which is called the Spinola Hours, which we can look at that later.
So it's very well.
I mean, when they walked in and said, set the stuff down and said, well, we represent this collector named Ludwig, and he's interested in selling this collection, I mean, I was completely flabbergasted.
You didn't know what this meeting was about when you walked in?
Well, no, I didn't.
I didn't know that.
I mean, obviously it was about acquisition of something.
They assumed, my boss assumed it had something to do with manuscripts.
They just said they wanted to come and see us.
And only at sort of at the meeting did I find out what was going on.
And you said you were flabbergasted.
Yeah, well, yeah, it was, because it was a great, great collection.
And I had actually, we all realized that, in the first place, it was an enormous amount of money that was coming to the museum.
And collecting in only three areas, there had always been a certain amount of talk about what else the museum could do besides collecting paintings and French furniture and antiquities and so on.
gone a couple of times on my trips to Europe in the meantime to visit the manuscripts people at Sotheby's to see if there was anything terrific coming up in a sale, and perhaps maybe.
So I sort of held out this vague hope that maybe a terrific manuscript would come along someday.
We might buy one great manuscript.
But I never really imagined that we would have an opportunity like this.
So basically what happened was that I was asked to go over and see the stuff, which I happily did, and I spent about a week
Half of it was in Cologne, and I spent a week in Aachen at the Ludwig's house looking at things in the library.
And they just brought in one manuscript after another, and I went through them page by page, actually.
That was very exciting.
Yeah, it was fun, actually.
And then I went.
Then the other half were kept in Switzerland, and I went to Zurich and sat in the bank vault for another three or four days and looked through the rest of them.
And it was quite a—it was a peak experience, I think.
Were they selling because it was time, or was it particularly smart?
There was an official public statement about that they were selling, I think it—I could perhaps even dig it out, but I think that there was—he said he was going to start a foundation for our historical research, and that he was raising money to establish this foundation to further research or something.
And I don't actually know what ever came of that.
I mean, off the record— If you say off the record, it's off the record.
I think, actually, he was this big chocolate manufacturer.
And my impression is that those factories were already declining, though, and that there was a serious cash flow problem.
That was the motivation.
And eventually, if you sort of do some digging through the newspapers, I think
most of his chocolate interests were sold in the last four or five years.
I mean, if I find this, I'll believe it.
Yeah, okay.
I don't really see it as that big a deal.
Well, except it's an interesting story, but I think he did sell, I mean, there was an official reason, and there was a press release that he was selling for these, because he was going to use the money to further, because he is a great philanthropist in the sense that he has created collections, which he's planted in museums all over the world, and I mean, he's an interesting... He's the kind of person that I'm... Yeah, he's absolutely one of the great collectors of the 20th century.
And he's interesting because he builds collections so that, in a sense, he can plant them in one institution or another and put his name on them.
So there, you know, in Aachen, I guess, the Sermont Museum, which is a collection mostly in medieval art, is now called the Sermont Ludwig Museum, and it contains his collection of medieval sculpture.
There's the Ludwig Museum in Cologne now, which is part of this complex of museums in the center of the city near the train station.
And some of the great objects in that museum are from Ludwig.
He had, I think, one of the greatest collections of American pop painting.
Really?
Yeah.
Actually, one of the interesting stories about the manuscripts is he started buying in 58, somewhere in the late 60s.
And you can find the answer to this in Krauss's book.
He gives the time.
Ludwig wanted to raise some money to buy American pop art.
He decided he was going to go into this area.
So he took some of his best manuscripts and sold them back to Krauss.
And six or eight years later, or some period of time later, when he had money again, after he bought all the American pop art,
He brought back from Krauss most of those manuscripts, the things that Krauss hadn't sold in the meantime.
So then, in fact, Ludwig bought a number of the great things in the collection twice from Krauss.
And since Krauss sold them to us, Krauss actually handled some of these manuscripts three times.
He did very well.
They don't like to be called dealers, but they are.
No, no, no.
He was an amazing dealer.
He was very proud of the fact that he did very well.
I'm surprised.
You know, if you want to buy something of that magnitude from Great Britain, I mean, you go, that stuff doesn't leave the country these days.
I'm surprised they allow that stuff to leave.
Well, that's interesting.
You know, every European country has a different kind of export law.
And in Germany, the law is always based on what is called the list.
And there's actually a list of works of art in Germany that cannot be exported.
And, I mean, it's a finite thing.
And there were, none of these objects were on the list.
And it's as simple as that.
And I think...
A certain number of ... Well, again, I think this is something that I should say off the record, but it's worth reporting on some level, is that he probably kept a certain number of things in Switzerland to make sure that they never got on the list, so to sense.
They're not in Germany.
The Germans can't do anything about them.
And I could go back to my notes and see which ones were kept in Germany.
It's been so long, I don't remember them all.
But the fact is that he wasn't unaware
you know, that maybe the laws could change or something like that.
I think the issue that we faced, which was a difficult issue, was the, it was clear that these catalogs were being paid for by the city of Cologne.
And I had understood, I mean, the one thing that, one of the reasons that I was surprised to have them offered was I had understood that this was a collection that he was giving to the city of Cologne.
And so, at first I actually thought
They were playing a kind of a game with us, and for some reason, they were trying to go back.
They were going to find us, try to get us interested in the collection, and then maybe go back to the city of Cologne for some reason to see if they can get better concessions, because, you know, Ludwig would get, one of his things is he would get, I guess, someone, he'd give a collection, but you had to build a building for it or something like that.
So maybe I thought there was some kind, we were being used as a pawn in some kind of political bartering.
So we sort of actually moved in it.
I mean, I was incredibly enthusiastic.
I mean, it was a great, great opportunity for us.
But at the same time, we wanted, we looked at the situation very, very carefully.
We wanted that.
We absolutely tried to be incredibly careful that we don't do anything that's illegal.
There was a complicated set of, you know, there are other issues here, kind of moral issues, if you like.
But it became very, very clear after a while that, from dealing with him, that he needed to sell them.
For whatever reason, he was eager to raise a certain amount of money.
This was very, very clear.
It was obvious to me at a certain point that there was no way that Cologne and the German government was likely to turn around and buy this collection.
So I didn't feel in a sense that, if anything, we were probably saving the collection from being broken up.
And the other thing is from my point of view, I mean, about all of this is when it goes from a private collection to a public collection, it becomes much, much more accessible to scholars and the public in the whole world.
And in fact, these objects have probably been displayed
better and more often in the last ten years than they have in their entire previous history, and more people have had a chance to see them.
And they're being taken care of.
They're in a safe place.
You know they're going to be well taken care of here.
Right.
In fairness, I mean, I think Ludwig took good care of them too, but I think we make them available in a way that an institution can.
But at least that they know the new home is certainly going to be at least as good as the old home.
Well, the fun part of being a curator is making great things available to the widest possible audience.
And that's one part of the job.
Were you involved in the numbers?
I mean, I know the number, and I don't want to get you into that, but were you involved in those negotiations?
My job was to value the collection.
And the way I did it is I did it object by object.
I literally did research on each object and tried to figure out what I thought the fair market buy of each object was.
And we told it up, and we rounded it off to the nearest million or whatever.
or half million or something, and because it was 143 objects, it was a lot.
And I simply went to the president, at that point, this was before John Walsh was hired, the place was sort of really being run by Harold Williams.
And I basically said, you know, this is a great collection, and this is what it means art historically, and so on.
This is what I think it's worth in the market today.
And then he took that figure
And he actually did the negotiating.
And there was a period.
It was an interesting negotiation because it fell apart completely at one point.
The figure that I recommended was about half of what the asking price was.
It was an enormous disparity.
Really?
And I think that that was found to be rather disconcerting.
And so things didn't move very far.
And I think probably, I mean, I have to ask Carol about this, but I suspect he probably thought this is what they were worth and this is what we should pay.
Eventually, what happened was that Jake Zeitlin, although Klaus always gets the credit for this deal, there seems to be some kind of an arrangement with book dealers where if a book dealer moves into someone else's territory, he brings in a book dealer or the leading book dealer from that area.
This is kind of in Zeitlin's oral history, by the way.
Oh, it is?
Okay.
Yeah, interesting.
It's true.
You're right.
Yeah, I mention it because at the time, I didn't actually realize what Zeitlin's role was at all, and I found out about this later.
But apparently, actually, Zeitlin himself realized that things were going badly, and he thought,
He knew that Ludwig wanted to sell, and he apparently went back to Ludwig and said, look, if you'll make a significant decline on the price, things will start moving again.
I mean, again, you may know the story better than I do, but that's what Jake eventually told me.
And then, in fact, that's what happened.
In fact, I think that Ludwig came back to Harold, and then Harold felt like he was more in a negotiating ballpark, and it went back and forth and back and forth, and eventually he put together what I think was an amazing deal.
He got better terms than I had recommended.
Really?
Yeah.
Significantly better terms than I'd recommend.
Terms in terms of time or in terms of numbers?
Well, let me ask it this way.
I find a piece of paper that said I never reveal the... No, no, then let's leave it alone, because I don't think it's there.
There's a lot of difference.
I've never heard anyone actually give... The terms are complicated, and I've never heard anyone... Many people have said, oh, it costs so much, but no one has ever gotten the whole story right.
And who needs it?
It's an interesting story, conceptually, that we need that.
We might make an inquiry since it happened so many years ago, but I was asked in any case now.
But anyway, I think actually, for what it's worth, I mean, I think we did get a very favorable deal, and given the direction in which the market has moved since then, the collection is worth, you know, many times what we paid for it, I think.
I think the significance of it, though, beyond the numbers, of course, which is interesting,
but more significantly, with that one acquisition, you became a major.
You created a manuscript department.
Yeah, that was the exciting part.
Let's talk a little bit about that.
Overnight, you became, you changed jobs, so to speak, or you added responsibilities.
Yeah, well, actually, the way they did it, actually, was rather, in the sort of typical Getty way, I was given the option of applying for the job to run the department.
And, in fact, they did sort of conduct a search and interview people from all over, I gather,
And eventually, I did get the job.
I took them away.
They actually did sort of do a thorough search for a year.
So, I mean, if nothing else, it made me feel like I'd sort of stood up against the competition in the meantime.
And the other thing they did, which was rather sneaky, was they waited a year to—actually, it wasn't sneaky.
It was perfectly reasonable.
I think they were themselves in a bit of a state of shock that they had actually gone ahead
and done something like this, because again, this was back in 1983.
There were still only three collections.
This was the first time we'd made a major move into a new collection.
It really was an enormous amount of money for any institution to pay, because it was far more than buying an expensive painting.
I mean, it was buying 140 terrific objects.
And so they said, actually, fine, you have your 143 manuscripts now lay off.
And I, in fact, was still in the thanks department, and I ended up clearly buying a lot of other pictures and stuff.
So I went back for about a year to be much more involved than now.
In fact, we also agreed, because we didn't have a staff.
It was just me.
I had an assistant.
But there was no way I could start making the books available to people.
There was no way we could exhibit them right away.
We needed to figure out how to store them properly, how to make a facility for scholars to come and look at them, how to exhibit them in a way that was safe for them.
And so we just decided, we actually took them and locked them up for about nine months.
And we waited, it was almost a year before we actually exhibited them, because we wanted to make sure we had the proper kinds of cases and all that.
And we wanted to have a proper storage facility.
And that in itself, the sort of mechanics of curatorial work of setting up the department are pretty labor intensive.
And we did a lot of research.
We brought in consultants, people who knew better about manuscripts conservation than I did, and got the best advice we could.
It was an interesting time.
And we also started the arduous task of recording and describing these manuscripts for our records.
So you essentially started the collection with these 140 manuscripts, right?
Yeah.
And at numbers now, I think we've... About 180, I think.
Close to 190.
So really, that's the core collection, right?
Yeah, it is the core collection.
There were a group of text manuscripts that actually were interesting manuscripts, but I think the money could be used to buy more illuminated manuscripts.
So we sold about eight items from the library collection.
So there are about 135 of the library manuscripts, and then maybe 43 other things since then.
So that's about 100, yeah.
Yeah, it's the core collection.
So you really haven't been on a wild screen since then?
No, I could have easily spent more money than I did.
There were more terrific things out there than we've had money for.
That's for sure.
I don't have an unlimited budget, and I never did.
And I do try to hold back to buy things that are really terrific, which means sometimes buying... In essence, I bought things once every year and a half or so simply because things are so expensive.
You know, great things are terribly expensive.
There was just this bestiary sold in December for $6 million.
I mean, actually, I did on it, but I wasn't even close.
I just didn't have the money.
Where was it?
It was in New York.
It was a sale in London at Sotheby's.
Most of the great illuminated manuscript sales were at Sotheby's in London.
Occasionally, there are others, but those are the most important ones.
Let's go back to something you said at the beginning, when you're thinking about doing a show about illuminated manuscripts that come out of
of the collections of art collectors.
Could you tell me who some of these collectors are and how these items happen to get into their collections, and how do you think they happen?
Well, actually, yeah, I'm thinking more of the great book collectors who collected illuminated manuscripts, like we have manuscripts, collectors you'll know, like Robert Ho and Courtland Bishop and the Astor Collection, which originally, the collection started to be built when Astor was still an American family before it became a British family.
What else do we have?
We only have Beatty manuscripts.
Beatty was an American after all.
And perhaps for us the most important was Philip Hofer, because we bought five manuscripts that Hofer had found at one time or another.
And you must know.
Of course, yeah.
Well, the interesting thing is, most of his printed books went to Harvard, but he never intended for the illuminated manuscripts.
He gave a couple of illuminated things.
He actually gave some illuminated things to Harvard, I gather, but a number of the greatest things he never intended for them to have, although he gave them.
I mean, he was incredibly generous with them, but for whatever reason, had never intended to give them.
So these, you have acquired in the normal process, and it just happens that a number of them have pretty interesting associations.
Yeah.
Now, do you think that these collectors collected them as art objects?
Each collector, I suppose, is different.
Well, Beatty was a great collector of illuminated manuscripts.
Um, Hofer, yes, Hofer was a great connoisseur.
I mean, he collected beautiful books.
I mean, he was a beautiful art, but he had an amazing taste, and he collected other kinds of art objects.
So he was one of these people who was an art collector, book collector.
Now, there are different kinds of book collectors, and there are those who are more
text-oriented in a sense, I don't know, sort of postage stamp-oriented in the sense of getting one of these and one of those.
And there are others who I think collect more for the beauty and perfection of, I mean, even for books that aren't necessarily illustrated books, for great printing or whatever.
I mean, there are great copies, there are beautiful, aesthetically wonderful copies, and there are copies that are representative but may be nicked up and may be not so perfect and so on.
So they're different, you know, they're different kinds of collectors.
But I think Hofer was one who collected the great object.
If you aren't in the process now of adding vigorously to the collection, do you nevertheless have goals?
I mean, do you have a focus for it?
Oh, absolutely.
Well, I mean, the thing is, where would you like to go with it?
Well, frankly, I'd like to be as big and large and fine as we can be.
I mean, again, we're trying to make a collection that is representative.
I mean, we're trying to represent most of the great schools and most of the great periods.
where it's possible to great artists.
For example, and to some extent, we're subject to what is available.
It's even a later stage, in a sense, collecting illuminated manuscripts than it is, say, old master paintings, because there's just not that much really great material that's left.
And if you look at the things we've bought in the last ten, well, whatever it is, eight years now or seven years, it's mostly late medieval stuff, because there are terrific late medieval things left.
We bought one great tenth-century manuscript, but
nothing before then, and actually not a lot from the 11th throughout the 13th centuries.
There's simply not that much really terrific material.
And we're trying, we're working on it, and we're chasing things.
That's very important, and I think that was mentioned by one of the pieces that you sent me, one of the news articles you sent me there.
What you did by acquiring the Ludwig Collection is to do something that really nobody else could do, even if they had the funds.
That did give you an opportunity to become a major player.
At a time, it was probably considered impossible to do so for any institution.
Yeah, I think that's right.
Is that a fair assessment?
Yeah, because as I said, I'd always hoped that maybe we'd buy a great illuminated manuscript, but I never imagined that we'd ever have a significant collection.
It just seemed like it was too late in the game.
So the Ludwig, yeah, I think that's right.
The Ludwig Collection made that level of difference.
But there's still terrific things you can add to it.
For example, for whatever reason, he was particularly weak in late medieval French manuscripts, which is a great time for France.
And so we've bought, in fact, there's this great manuscript by Fouquet, which was unknown, which came up in California, both places in, what was it?
Must have been about seven years ago.
And so we bought that, and we bought actually a number of the major, Bordy Charon and a number of the major illuminators from the 15th century.
And we have a nice, I think, small, but representative collection of what happened there, which is not part of, I mean, in a sense, that's all pretty much new.
There are a couple of the big manuscripts.
So there are areas that we've gone into and developed.
On the other hand, I mean, in the end, when push comes to shove, we're going to buy the best things we can buy.
And he had a terrific collection of Flemish manuscripts, but that's also an area where there's a lot of good stuff left, and some of the best things we've bought have also been Flemish.
And I work in Flemish, and so I have a bias in favor of it.
But I think, in fairness, even if I didn't work in Flemish, the stuff that remains is so terrific.
You know, if you can get it, you buy it.
So we want to buy beautiful objects.
We want to buy the great object as far as we can.
then as far as we can represent, we can represent the history of illumination where we will.
Inevitably, every collection has different strengths, so, I mean, we'll never be great in Italian.
It's hard to, Ludwig didn't do particularly well in Italian.
It's very hard to buy great Italian manuscripts.
They're simply not to be had, they're not to be found, or they can't be exported.
We bought a number, we bought some beautiful Italian cuttings, so we're representing some of the artists, but frankly, in the end,
There's some beautiful objects, but it'll be a worthwhile thing to do.
It'll never be a great, great collection.
It's just too late.
Is there a great Italian collection in the United States?
Yeah, the Morgan has great Italian things, fabulous Italian things.
Because you've got that stuff where you can get it, too.
Yeah, right.
Well, see, if you look at what Morgan did, which is very interesting, is he bought, he started out by buying whole collections himself.
He didn't buy just one Ludwig collection.
He bought a whole series of them.
They got all the William Morris material.
and some of these other great collections.
So he started out by picking up collections, and he was truly an amazing, absolutely amazing performance.
Yeah, yeah.
Which moral issues do you mean?
Well, what I had said was that, you know, my impression was that Ludwig had promised the manuscripts to the Schnutkin Museum, and so on.
And it was the city of Cologne that actually paid for the publication of his catalog, so he had some kind of an arrangement.
I think it turned—I don't actually— Yeah, I don't know, in fact.
I gather that nothing was ever on paper, although I honestly don't know that.
But, as I said, so in a sense that one had to wonder exactly what Ludwig's motives were.
But in the end, it was clear, as I said, it was clear to us that no matter what happened, Ludwig was going to sell these manuscripts because he needed money.
And therefore, I mean, if we didn't buy them, someone else would buy them.
And from my point of view, frankly, if they go to a public, I mean, we're a private institution technically, but because we make things available to the public,
in a way that no private collector usually can or does, in a sense, it seems to me we're doing the moral and right thing in a certain way.
These manuscripts are now available to the world in a way that they weren't before.
And I actually think that museums perform, I mean, people always talk about the Getty devouring things.
But the fact is that we have the potential to form a terrific public function, which is to make great objects that hardly anyone has ever seen available to the widest possible audience.
And I think that is terrific.
Do you really hear that, the Getty devouring things?
Well, not so much anymore because the money doesn't go so far.
I mean, one has to remember, I mean, I only buy a couple of objects a year, but most of the collections in the museum only buy a couple of objects a year anymore, because the money just doesn't go that far.
I mean, that's one acquisition.
Exactly.
And our budget hasn't increased for years.
And, I mean, we've sort of had a steady state budget because they're building this building project.
So if we're going to buy quality, if we're going to buy the so-called great object, then you have to save your pennies and make sure you're ready for, you know, you've got the money there when the time comes.
So it's not, we're not,
I think when—I remember when I first started, people always said, well, we were so rich that we would wreck the art market.
And there's no—you know, every time a very rich collector comes into the art market, prices go up.
I mean, there's no question that we would affect the art market, and in some areas we've affected it more than others.
I think probably psychologically the fact that a museum went in and bought the Ludwig Manuscripts had an effect on the art market, whether or not we would have continued to buy in the sense that
The participation of a museum in any collecting area tends to validate that area and bring collectors in.
And in fact, a number of the really big collectors in luminary manuscripts now weren't so active when we started.
So, I mean, there may be a number of reasons for that.
But one of the reasons may be that participation of a museum tends to sort of legitimize certain things, you know, sort of institutional approval.
We'd love to see some of your things.
Sure, sure.
Would you like to see, actually, how should we do this?
Do you want to see Ludwig things?
Do you want to see Ethan things?
Do you want to see our mystery of the Jews?
Money, and so there are many, many things that we do, and it's not quite the bottomless, but the way I wish it was.
One thing I didn't get is you said ideally you'd like to have a collection of 400 writers, but why don't you just say that again?
I'd like to have a question for him.
It's not likely realistic given the kind of money that's available.
I think that would be...
I can show you everything that I bought in the last three or four years in about 10 minutes.
There's some great things.
Hopefully you'll have a hard time looking at them.
In seven years we've bought about 43 things.
It's not wrong.
Well, it could be lovely things.
Yeah, no, they're still great things.
They're still great things.
I mean, you can actually do it.
There are probably fewer important or good manuscripts left to find altogether, but they're still great objects.
There's still a lot of medicine.
There's a lot of good Leonardo, Michelangelo, Raffaello painting.
You might get something close to it and it might just get any sense.
Do you get a charger when you pick these up in the morning?
Do they constantly give you a thrill?
I love it.
Creators are greedy people.
They're collectors, really.
They collect materials.
There it is, huh?
Come and have your picture taken by now.
That's a nice thing.
Oh, yeah.
This is the Dyson Perons Apocalypse, which is probably one of the cornerstones of the Elizabeth collection.
It's 13th century English.
In fact, the 13th century in England, English Gothic was one of the great periods for manuscript illumination.
Apocalypse was probably the most famous subject matter for
for English Gothic, a number of great examples.
This is not the greatest one, but it's a terrific example.
And Dyson Perrins actually was the Ludwig at the first half of the 20th century.
He was, actually his collection was already put together at the very beginning of the century, but was one of the great private collections of Luminaire manuscripts.
He was, what are they called, the Ian Perrins Worcestershire sauce.
That was Dyson Perrins.
And he died in, I think it was January of 58.
And by the end of the year, they had organized three major sales, 58, 59, and 60.
And important for this story because that's when Krauss started buying really expensive manuscripts and when he found Ludwig as a client.
And in fact, I think Ludwig bought his first book from Krauss in 58.
That was actually the same year that Ludwig started collecting.
And it was the same year they started selling Dyson Ferentz's.
So some of the great things in Little Big Collection are Dyson Ferentz's manuscripts.
700 years old.
And this book has 82 miniatures.
Every page has a miniature at the top.
And the story of the book of Apocalypse is the book of Revelations.
And so it gives the biblical text in black ink.
And then there's a commentary about what it all means in red ink.
And then the illustrations.
It was English, and it escaped the dissolution.
I wonder if it must have
I wonder how it survived.
Do you think this was ever in the British monastery?
Oh yeah, probably at one point.
Unless it was made for a private person.
A book like this may have been made for a noblewoman.
Of course, a noblewoman could have been an abbess or whatever, a monastery or whatever.
but these probably were made for the great ladies.
So what we did, what we always try to do is have something, a show that's coherent thematically.
So this manuscript is the purpose of the show.
If you want to treat the book as a work of art, you have a real problem because usually they tell stories and
The work of art is, in a sense, functions through a sequence of images, but of course you can only open the book to one page.
And at a place like us, where we're sort of an odd location, you don't exactly have off-the-street traffic where people walk in at lunchtime to see a show, so it doesn't make sense to turn the pages.
So what we do is we put transparencies of other miniatures from the great books that are on view here, so people get some idea what the rest of the book looks like.
It's an imperfect system, but it gives you some idea.
And we also sort of put them
against the walls and down in a way because, in a sense, we don't want people to get the ideas that these are the primary things.
The art object comes first.
The other one I've seen do this, though, to give us more than one page.
The Morgan Library sometimes does it for special shows, but they don't.
Actually, when I set up this, I know the people there, and I went and said, well, what have you guys done right, and what have you done wrong, and how can we improve?
And they said, well, we always have our experiences up on the wall like this, and they always compete with the objects.
So I said, fine, I'm not going to do that.
I'll do it this way.
In this particular show, all the things in the cases are from the main book, the Oppenheims, so if you really get into it, you can put that most of the book together.
This is actually another one of the great writing manuscripts.
He had three Ottonian manuscripts, which is 10th and 11th century.
Actually, most of ours are 11th century, which were really terrific.
and among the great things.
And this house also has a beautiful treasury binding, which is a little hard to see.